A genetic network can be represented as a directed graph in which a node
corresponds to a gene and a directed edge specifies the direction of
influence of one gene on another. The reconstruction of such networks from
transcript profiling data remains an important yet challenging endeavor. A
transcript profile specifies the abundances of many genes in a biological
sample of interest. Prevailing strategies for learning the structure of a
genetic network from high-dimensional transcript profiling data assume
sparsity and linearity. Many methods consider relatively small directed
graphs, inferring graphs with up to a few hundred nodes. This work examines
large undirected graphs representations of genetic networks, graphs with
many thousands of nodes where an undirected edge between two nodes does not
indicate the direction of influence, and the problem of estimating the
structure of such a sparse linear genetic network (SLGN) from transcript
profiling data.
The structure learning task is cast as a sparse linear regression problem
which is then posed as a LASSO (l1-constrained fitting) problem and solved
finally by formulating a Linear Program (LP). A bound on the Generalization
Error of this approach is given in terms of the Leave-One-Out Error. The
accuracy and utility of LP-SLGNs is assessed quantitatively and
qualitatively using simulated and real data. The Dialogue for Reverse
Engineering Assessments and Methods (DREAM) initiative provides gold
standard data sets and evaluation metrics that enable and facilitate the
comparison of algorithms for deducing the structure of networks. The
structures of LP-SLGNs estimated from the INSILICO1, INSILICO2 and INSILICO3
simulated DREAM2 data sets are comparable to those proposed by the first
and/or second ranked teams in the DREAM2 competition. The structures of
LP-SLGNs estimated from two published Saccharomyces cerevisae cell cycle
transcript profiling data sets capture known regulatory associations. In
each S. cerevisiae LP-SLGN, the number of nodes with a particular degree
follows an approximate power law suggesting that its degree distributions is
similar to that observed in real-world networks. Inspection of these
LP-SLGNs suggests biological hypotheses amenable to experimental
verification.
A statistically robust and computationally efficient LP-based method for
estimating the topology of a large sparse undirected graph from
high-dimensional data yields representations of genetic networks that are
biologically plausible and useful abstractions of the structures of real
genetic networks. Analysis of the statistical and topological properties of
learned LP-SLGNs may have practical value; for example, genes with high
random walk betweenness, a measure of the centrality of a node in a graph,
are good candidates for intervention studies and hence integrated
computational - experimental investigations designed to infer more realistic
and sophisticated probabilistic directed graphical model representations of
genetic networks. The LP-based solutions of the sparse linear regression
problem described here may provide a method for learning the structure of
transcription factor networks from transcript profiling and transcription
factor binding motif data.
