African non-human primates (NHPs) are natural hosts for simian
immunodeficiency viruses (SIV), the zoonotic transmission of which led to
the emergence of HIV-1 and HIV-2. However, our understanding of SIV
diversity and evolution is limited by incomplete taxonomic and geographic
sampling of NHPs, particularly in East Africa. In this study, we screened
blood specimens from nine black-and-white colobus monkeys (Colobus guereza
occidentalis) from Kibale National Park, Uganda, for novel SIVs using a
combination of serology and "unbiased" deep-sequencing, a method that does
not rely on genetic similarity to previously characterized viruses.
We identified two novel and divergent SIVs, tentatively named SIVkcol-1 and
SIVkcol-2, and assembled genomes covering the entire coding region for each
virus. SIVkcol-1 and SIVkcol-2 were detected in three and four animals,
respectively, but with no animals co-infected. Phylogenetic analyses showed
that SIVkcol-1 and SIVkcol-2 form a lineage with SIVcol, previously
discovered in black-and-white colobus from Cameroon. Although SIVkcol-1 and
SIVkcol-2 were isolated from the same host population in Uganda, SIVkcol-1
is more closely related to SIVcol than to SIVkcol-2. Analysis of functional
motifs in the extracellular envelope glycoprotein (gp120) revealed that
SIVkcol-2 is unique among primate lentiviruses in containing only 16
conserved cysteine residues instead of the usual 18 or more.
Our results demonstrate that the genetic diversity of SIVs infecting
black-and-white colobus across equatorial Africa is greater than previously
appreciated and that divergent SIVs can co-circulate in the same colobine
population. We also show that the use of "unbiased" deep sequencing for the
detection of SIV has great advantages over traditional serological
approaches, especially for studies of unknown or poorly characterized
viruses. Finally, the detection of the first SIV containing only 16
conserved cysteines in the extracellular envelope protein gp120 further
expands the range of functional motifs observed among SIVs and highlights
the complex evolutionary history of simian retroviruses.
