Given the large energy required for its electronic excitation, the most
important properties of the water molecule are governed by its ground
potential energy surface (PES). Novel experiments are now able to probe this
surface over a very extended energy range, requiring new theoretical
procedures for their interpretation. As part of this study, a new, accurate,
global spectroscopic-quality PES and a new, accurate, global dipole moment
surface are developed. They are used for the computation of the
high-resolution spectrum of water up to the first dissociation limit and
beyond as well as for the determination of Stark coefficients for high-lying
states. The water PES has been determined by combined ab initio and
semi-empirical studies. As a first step, a very accurate, global, ab initio
PES was determined using the all-electron, internally contracted
multi-reference configuration interaction technique together with a large
Gaussian basis set. Scalar relativistic energy corrections are also
determined in order to move the energy determinations close to the
relativistic complete basis set full configuration interaction limit. The
electronic energies were computed for a set of about 2500 geometries,
covering carefully selected configurations from equilibrium up to
dissociation. Nuclear motion computations using this PES reproduce the
observed energy levels up to 39 000 cm(-1) with an accuracy of better than
10 cm(-1). Line positions and widths of resonant states above dissociation
show an agreement with experiment of about 50 cm(-1). An improved
semi-empirical PES is produced by fitting the ab initio PES to accurate
experimental data, resulting in greatly improved accuracy, with a maximum
deviation of about 1 cm(-1) for all vibrational band origins. Theoretical
results based on this semi-empirical surface are compared with experimental
data for energies starting at 27 000 cm(-1), going all the way up to
dissociation at about 41 000 cm(-1) and a few hundred wavenumbers beyond it.
